README.md, before:

# Speech Drives Templates

The official repo for the ICCV-2021 paper "Speech Drives Templates: Co-Speech Gesture Synthesis with Learned Templates".

<p align="center">
  <img src="./iccv2021_sdt.jpg" width=500px/>
</p>

Our paper and this repo focus on upper-body pose generation from audio. To synthesize images from poses, please refer to this [Pose2Img](https://github.com/zyhbili/Pose2Img) repo.

## Directory hierarchy

```
|-- config
|     |-- default.py
|     |-- voice2pose_s2g.yaml        # baseline: speech2gesture
|     |-- voice2pose_sdt_bp.yaml     # ours (Backprop)
|     |-- voice2pose_sdt_vae.yaml    # ours (VAE)
|     \-- pose2pose.yaml             # gesture reconstruction  
|
|-- core
|     |-- datasets
|     |-- netowrks
|     |-- pipelines
|     \-- utils
|
|-- datasets
|     \-- speakers
|           |-- oliver
|           |-- kubinec
|           \-- ...
|
|-- output
|     \-- <date-config-tag>  # A directory for each experiment
|
`-- main.py

```

## Installation

To generate videos, you need `ffmpeg` in your system.

```shell
sudo apt install ffmpeg
```

Install Python packages

```shell
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Dataset

We use a subset (Oliver and Kubinec) of the [Speech2Gesture](https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~shiry/projects/speech2gesture/index.html) dataset and remove frames with bad human poses. We also collect data of two mandarine speakers (Luo and Xing).

To ease later research, we pack our processed data. Please download from this [link](https://shanghaitecheducn-my.sharepoint.com/:f:/g/personal/qianshh_shanghaitech_edu_cn/EhOVnrnCYS5KqDIkamXBJbgBLOzu8vEFGwy88jSRSNATFA?e=Hc0cOO) and organize them under `datasets/speakers` as the above dirctory hierarchy. Note that these packages only provide 2d human pose sequences and corresponding audio clips. For video frames, please refer to the [Speech2Gesture](https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~shiry/projects/speech2gesture/index.html) dataset.

Since our method address the entire upper body including the face and hands, the number of keypoints in our data is 137. For more details, please refer to [this](./pose_definition.md) document.

### Custom dataset
To build a dataset from custom videos, we provide reference scripts in `data_preprocess/`:
```
# ==== video processing ====
1_1_change_fps.py           # we use fps=15 by default
1_2_video2frames.py         # save each video as images

# ==== keypoint processing ====
2_1_gen_kpts.py             # use openpose to obtain keypoints
2_2_remove_outlier.py       # remove a frame with bad predicted keypoints
(2_3_rescale_shoulder_width.py  # rescale the keypoints)

# ==== npz processing ====
3_1_generate_clips.py       # generate a csv files as an index and npz files for clips
3_2_split_train_val_test.py # edit the csv file for dataset division

# ==== speakers_stat processing ====
4_1_calculate_mean_std.py   # save the mean and std of each keypoint (137 points) into a npy file
4_2_parse_mean_std_npz.py   # parse the above npy and print out for `speakers_stat.py`
```

> The step 2_3 is optional. It rescales the keypoints so that a new speaker has the same shoulder width as Oliver, and then you can simply copy the `scale_factor`  of Oliver for the new speaker in `speakers_stat.py`.

## Training SDT-BP

**Training** from scratch

``` bash
python main.py --config_file configs/voice2pose_sdt_bp.yaml \
    --tag oliver \
    DATASET.SPEAKER oliver \
    SYS.NUM_WORKERS 32
```

- `--tag` set the name of the experiment which wil be displayed in the outputfile.
- You can overwrite any parameter defined in `configs/default.py` by simply
adding it at the end of the command. The example above set `SYS.NUM_WORKERS` to 32 temporarily.

Resume **training** from an interrupted experiment

``` bash
python main.py --config_file configs/voice2pose_sdt_bp.yaml \
    --resume_from <checkpoint-to-continue-from> \
    DATASET.SPEAKER oliver
```

- With `--resume_from`, the program will load the `state_dict` from the checkpoint for both the model and the optimizer, and write results to the original directory that the checkpoint lies in.

**Training** from a pretrained model

``` bash
python main.py --config_file configs/voice2pose_sdt_bp.yaml \
    --pretrain_from <checkpoint-to-pretrain-from> \
    --tag oliver \
    DATASET.SPEAKER oliver
```

- With `--pretrain_from`, the program will only load the `state_dict` for the model, and write results to a new base directory.

## Evaluation

To **evaluate** a model, use `--test_only` and `--checkpoint` as follows

``` bash
python main.py --config_file configs/voice2pose_sdt_bp.yaml \
    --tag oliver \
    --test_only \
    --checkpoint <path-to-checkpoint> \
    DATASET.SPEAKER oliver
```

## Demo

To **evaluate** a model on an audio file, use `--demo_input` and `--checkpoint` as follows

```bash
python main.py --config_file configs/voice2pose_sdt_bp.yaml \
    --tag oliver \
    --demo_input demo_audio.wav \
    --checkpoint <path-to-checkpoint> \
    DATASET.SPEAKER oliver
```

You can find our checkpoint [here](https://shanghaitecheducn-my.sharepoint.com/:f:/g/personal/qianshh_shanghaitech_edu_cn/EhOVnrnCYS5KqDIkamXBJbgBLOzu8vEFGwy88jSRSNATFA?e=Hc0cOO).

## FTD computation and template vector extraction
### Pose sequence reconstruction with VAE
First, you need to train the VAE by pose sequence reconstruction:

```bash
python main.py --config_file configs/pose2pose.yaml \
    --tag oliver \
    DATASET.SPEAKER oliver
```

### Compute FTD while training SDT-BP
Once the VAE is train, you can compute FTD while training our **SDT-BP** model by spotting out `VOICE2POSE.POSE_ENCODER.AE_CHECKPOINT` as follows:

```bash
python main.py --config_file configs/voice2pose_sdt_bp.yaml \
    --tag oliver \
    DATASET.SPEAKER oliver \
    VOICE2POSE.POSE_ENCODER.AE_CHECKPOINT <path-to-VAE-checkpoint>
```

### Training SDT-VAE
By changing the config file and spotting out `VOICE2POSE.POSE_ENCODER.AE_CHECKPOINT`, you can train our **SDT-VAE** model, and the FTD metric will also be computed:

```bash
python main.py --config_file configs/voice2pose_sdt_vae.yaml \
    --tag oliver \
    DATASET.SPEAKER oliver \
    VOICE2POSE.POSE_ENCODER.AE_CHECKPOINT <path-to-VAE-checkpoint>
```

## Misc

- We save a checkpoint and conduct validation after each epoch. You can change the interval in the config file.

- We generate and save 2 videos in each epoch when training. During validation, we sample 8 videos for each epoch. These videos can be saved in tensorborad (without sound) and mp4 (with sound). You can change the `SYS.VIDEO_FORMAT` parameter to select one or two of them.

- For multi-GPU training, we recommand using DistributedDataParallel (DDP) because it provide SyncBN across GPU cards. To enable DDP, set `SYS.DISTRIBUTED` to `True` and set `SYS.WORLD_SIZE` according to the number of GPUs.
    > When using DDP, assure that the `batch_size` can be divided exactly by `SYS.WORLD_SIZE`.

- We usually set `NUM_WORKERS` to 32 for best performance. If you encounter any error about memory, try lower `NUM_WORKERS`.


- We also support dataset caching (`DATASET.CACHING`) to further speed up data loading.
    > If you encounter errors in the dataloader like `RuntimeError: received 0 items of ancdata`, please increase `ulimit` by running the command `ulimit -n 262144`. (refer to this [issue](https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/issues/973))

- To run any module other than the main files in the root directory, for example the `core\datasets\gesture_dataset.py` file, you should run `python -m core.datasets.gesture_dataset` rather than `python core\datasets\gesture_dataset.py`. This is an interesting problem of Python's relative importing.


```
@inproceedings{qian2021speech,
  title={Speech Drives Templates: Co-Speech Gesture Synthesis with Learned Templates},
  author={Qian, Shenhan and Tu, Zhi and Zhi, YiHao and Liu, Wen and Gao, Shenghua},
  journal={International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV)},
  year={2021}
}
```

Commit message:

Upload video links for Luo and Xing.

README.md, after:

# Speech Drives Templates

The official repo for the ICCV-2021 paper "Speech Drives Templates: Co-Speech Gesture Synthesis with Learned Templates".

<p align="center">
  <img src="./iccv2021_sdt.jpg" width=500px/>
</p>

Our paper and this repo focus on upper-body pose generation from audio. To synthesize images from poses, please refer to this [Pose2Img](https://github.com/zyhbili/Pose2Img) repo.

## Directory hierarchy

```
|-- config
|     |-- default.py
|     |-- voice2pose_s2g.yaml        # baseline: speech2gesture
|     |-- voice2pose_sdt_bp.yaml     # ours (Backprop)
|     |-- voice2pose_sdt_vae.yaml    # ours (VAE)
|     \-- pose2pose.yaml             # gesture reconstruction  
|
|-- core
|     |-- datasets
|     |-- netowrks
|     |-- pipelines
|     \-- utils
|
|-- datasets
|     \-- speakers
|           |-- oliver
|           |-- kubinec
|           \-- ...
|
|-- output
|     \-- <date-config-tag>  # A directory for each experiment
|
`-- main.py

```

## Installation

To generate videos, you need `ffmpeg` in your system.

```shell
sudo apt install ffmpeg
```

Install Python packages

```shell
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Dataset

We use a subset (Oliver and Kubinec) of the [Speech2Gesture](https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~shiry/projects/speech2gesture/index.html) dataset and remove frames with bad human poses. We also collect data of two mandarine speakers (Luo and Xing).

To ease later research, we pack our processed data including **2d human pose sequences** and corresponding **audio clips**.
Please download from this [link](https://shanghaitecheducn-my.sharepoint.com/:f:/g/personal/qianshh_shanghaitech_edu_cn/EhOVnrnCYS5KqDIkamXBJbgBLOzu8vEFGwy88jSRSNATFA?e=Hc0cOO) and organize the data under `datasets/speakers` as the above dirctory hierarchy.

Note that you do NOT need the **source video** frames to run this repo. In case you still want them for your own usage:
- For Luo and Xing, we provide the links of source videos as text files along side the above data packs.
- For Oliver and Kubinec, please refer to the [Speech2Gesture](https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~shiry/projects/speech2gesture/index.html) dataset. 

Since our method address the entire upper body including the face and hands, the number of keypoints in our data is 137. For more details, please refer to [this](./pose_definition.md) document.

### Custom dataset
To build a dataset from custom videos, we provide reference scripts in `data_preprocess/`:
```
# ==== video processing ====
1_1_change_fps.py           # we use fps=15 by default
1_2_video2frames.py         # save each video as images

# ==== keypoint processing ====
2_1_gen_kpts.py             # use openpose to obtain keypoints
2_2_remove_outlier.py       # remove a frame with bad predicted keypoints
(2_3_rescale_shoulder_width.py  # rescale the keypoints)

# ==== npz processing ====
3_1_generate_clips.py       # generate a csv files as an index and npz files for clips
3_2_split_train_val_test.py # edit the csv file for dataset division

# ==== speakers_stat processing ====
4_1_calculate_mean_std.py   # save the mean and std of each keypoint (137 points) into a npy file
4_2_parse_mean_std_npz.py   # parse the above npy and print out for `speakers_stat.py`
```

> The step 2_3 is optional. It rescales the keypoints so that a new speaker has the same shoulder width as Oliver, and then you can simply copy the `scale_factor`  of Oliver for the new speaker in `speakers_stat.py`.

## Training SDT-BP

**Training** from scratch

``` bash
python main.py --config_file configs/voice2pose_sdt_bp.yaml \
    --tag oliver \
    DATASET.SPEAKER oliver \
    SYS.NUM_WORKERS 32
```

- `--tag` set the name of the experiment which wil be displayed in the outputfile.
- You can overwrite any parameter defined in `configs/default.py` by simply
adding it at the end of the command. The example above set `SYS.NUM_WORKERS` to 32 temporarily.

Resume **training** from an interrupted experiment

``` bash
python main.py --config_file configs/voice2pose_sdt_bp.yaml \
    --resume_from <checkpoint-to-continue-from> \
    DATASET.SPEAKER oliver
```

- With `--resume_from`, the program will load the `state_dict` from the checkpoint for both the model and the optimizer, and write results to the original directory that the checkpoint lies in.

**Training** from a pretrained model

``` bash
python main.py --config_file configs/voice2pose_sdt_bp.yaml \
    --pretrain_from <checkpoint-to-pretrain-from> \
    --tag oliver \
    DATASET.SPEAKER oliver
```

- With `--pretrain_from`, the program will only load the `state_dict` for the model, and write results to a new base directory.

## Evaluation

To **evaluate** a model, use `--test_only` and `--checkpoint` as follows

``` bash
python main.py --config_file configs/voice2pose_sdt_bp.yaml \
    --tag oliver \
    --test_only \
    --checkpoint <path-to-checkpoint> \
    DATASET.SPEAKER oliver
```

## Demo

To **evaluate** a model on an audio file, use `--demo_input` and `--checkpoint` as follows

```bash
python main.py --config_file configs/voice2pose_sdt_bp.yaml \
    --tag oliver \
    --demo_input demo_audio.wav \
    --checkpoint <path-to-checkpoint> \
    DATASET.SPEAKER oliver
```

You can find our checkpoint [here](https://shanghaitecheducn-my.sharepoint.com/:f:/g/personal/qianshh_shanghaitech_edu_cn/EhOVnrnCYS5KqDIkamXBJbgBLOzu8vEFGwy88jSRSNATFA?e=Hc0cOO).

## FTD computation and template vector extraction
### Pose sequence reconstruction with VAE
First, you need to train the VAE by pose sequence reconstruction:

```bash
python main.py --config_file configs/pose2pose.yaml \
    --tag oliver \
    DATASET.SPEAKER oliver
```

### Compute FTD while training SDT-BP
Once the VAE is train, you can compute FTD while training our **SDT-BP** model by spotting out `VOICE2POSE.POSE_ENCODER.AE_CHECKPOINT` as follows:

```bash
python main.py --config_file configs/voice2pose_sdt_bp.yaml \
    --tag oliver \
    DATASET.SPEAKER oliver \
    VOICE2POSE.POSE_ENCODER.AE_CHECKPOINT <path-to-VAE-checkpoint>
```

### Training SDT-VAE
By changing the config file and spotting out `VOICE2POSE.POSE_ENCODER.AE_CHECKPOINT`, you can train our **SDT-VAE** model, and the FTD metric will also be computed:

```bash
python main.py --config_file configs/voice2pose_sdt_vae.yaml \
    --tag oliver \
    DATASET.SPEAKER oliver \
    VOICE2POSE.POSE_ENCODER.AE_CHECKPOINT <path-to-VAE-checkpoint>
```

## Misc

- We save a checkpoint and conduct validation after each epoch. You can change the interval in the config file.

- We generate and save 2 videos in each epoch when training. During validation, we sample 8 videos for each epoch. These videos can be saved in tensorborad (without sound) and mp4 (with sound). You can change the `SYS.VIDEO_FORMAT` parameter to select one or two of them.

- For multi-GPU training, we recommand using DistributedDataParallel (DDP) because it provide SyncBN across GPU cards. To enable DDP, set `SYS.DISTRIBUTED` to `True` and set `SYS.WORLD_SIZE` according to the number of GPUs.
    > When using DDP, assure that the `batch_size` can be divided exactly by `SYS.WORLD_SIZE`.

- We usually set `NUM_WORKERS` to 32 for best performance. If you encounter any error about memory, try lower `NUM_WORKERS`.


- We also support dataset caching (`DATASET.CACHING`) to further speed up data loading.
    > If you encounter errors in the dataloader like `RuntimeError: received 0 items of ancdata`, please increase `ulimit` by running the command `ulimit -n 262144`. (refer to this [issue](https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/issues/973))

- To run any module other than the main files in the root directory, for example the `core\datasets\gesture_dataset.py` file, you should run `python -m core.datasets.gesture_dataset` rather than `python core\datasets\gesture_dataset.py`. This is an interesting problem of Python's relative importing.


```
@inproceedings{qian2021speech,
  title={Speech Drives Templates: Co-Speech Gesture Synthesis with Learned Templates},
  author={Qian, Shenhan and Tu, Zhi and Zhi, YiHao and Liu, Wen and Gao, Shenghua},
  journal={International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV)},
  year={2021}
}
```
